Hi.
Welcome back to Programming for Network World.
Today's topic is mapping.
So we use maps all the time in our daily life.
We have them on our phones, and we use them in our cars
to guide us from point to point.
And you can also use maps within your NetFlux program.
So today, we're going to learn how to bring up a map
and to locate various topics or places of interest
in the world on those maps.
Ready to get mapping?
Let's get started.
OK, so like any other service in Nest Blocks, mapping is an RPC.
So if we go over to our Network tab
and we click on the Call block here, we can drop down
and we can see that there is a entry for Google Maps.
And if we look at what's available here,
there's lots of choices.
We'll just try GitMap for now.
And you can see, we'll move Ada over a little bit.
You can see that there are slots for latitude, longitude,
width, height, and zoom.
So latitude and longitude allow us
to find the coordinate location of any place on a map
projection.
So that is really important information
about where to locate items in maps.
We'll get to width, height, and zoom in a moment.
But how do we know our latitude and longitude?
Well, we could look it up online.
But fortunately, there's also a block
for that within Nest Blocks.
We'll go down here.
And you'll see here that there is
My Latitude and My Longitude.
Now, when I click on My Latitude,
if you have an enabled geospatial lookup
within your browser, you may get this pop-up.
And you just want to say Allow.
So we're going to allow that.
And now, the next time I click on it,
it should come back with a number.
So that represents My Latitude.
And the same thing here for My Longitude.
Now, the easy thing to do is just
to drop it into the slots that correspond to that.
And we're halfway there.
And the width and the height of the map
actually have to do with the width and height of our stage.
So we can also get that information right here,
Stage Height and Stage Width.
Of course, you can just type these in as numbers as well.
But this just makes it easier so that your map will adjust
as the size of the stage adjusts.
So here, we see that Stage Height is 360.
And the Stage Width, oops, I put it in the wrong place.
Stage Height, there we go.
Stage Width, we didn't check to see what the Stage Width was.
It was 480.
And let's do a default zoom of, say, 9.
Now, if we click that, you'll see that it
will go out to get a map.
But we have that same issue we've seen in other RPCs.
It's a very small map.
And that's because, as you know, in order
to make this appear on the stage,
we need to go to the Looks palette
and say Switch to Costume.
So now we can say Switch to Costume,
bring this down here, and click on this.
480 will disappear, and a map will appear in its place.
And this shows you where I am right now,
recording this in Nashville, Tennessee.
But oftentimes, in your programs,
you don't want to just show where you are now.
You often want to look up where you might like
to be or show other places.
So let's design a program to do what's called geolocation.
We're going to pass in an address.
Then we're going to get the coordinate location
of that address.
And then we're going to pass that information
into our mapping RPC and display that place on the map.
And just to make this more fun, let's
imagine that you're going on a college tour.
You're thinking about what college
you might like to attend.
And you want to see where these places are on a map.
So we're going to make this possible for us
to type in the name of a college, get its location,
and then show where it is on the map.
OK, so to do that, let's start off with sensing.
And we'll ask a question here.
So we'll say, ask.
And we'll bring it up here and say, what college
are we thinking about?
How about that?
It's a question.
And you know that when you ask a question like that
with the ask block, that the answer is captured here
in this answer block.
Now, we need to use a different RPC to get those coordinates.
And that is also built in.
But it's not in the same RPC that we've been using.
So let's go over here to get our call block again.
Let's drop it down.
And let's look at what's possible here.
And we see, for example, right above Google Maps,
very convenient, is geolocation.
And when we drop down geolocation,
we can get a lot of different types of information
we can pass in.
Basically, we could pass in a street address, a city name.
We can see what's nearby.
We can ask about different countries.
So there's lots of things you can do here.
We're just going to use this geolocate.
And it asks for an address.
Now, you might think you have to give
like the street address of colleges
and go to their website and look that up.
But actually, it will figure this out for you.
This is the nice thing about this block.
For the most part, you can just type
in the name of what you're interested in.
And it will try to geolocate it for you.
So I might try, for example, Vanderbilt University
and try this out.
Let's see.
And now I get a list of lists, latitude and longitude.
So OK, we know when we get information back
in that form of a list of lists, we've done this before,
that we need to go over and start
extracting that information.
Because in order to pass in latitude and longitude,
we need to get those separately.
So let's do that.
And the easiest way to do that, perhaps, is to get a variable.
And we'll call this our place or maybe our college or maybe,
yeah, our college is fine.
So we'll call it our college.
And then here, we're going to call.
We'll have a block where we set that variable here.
And we're going to set our college
to the value of this RPC.
But we're going to use that answer variable here
to say what college we're looking for.
OK, so that's good.
That'll capture that information for our college.
Now, in order to be able to pass it
in as my latitude and my longitude,
we'll take that out because that always shows me
where I am right now.
And we want to show where I'd like
to be when I'm thinking about this college.
So here, we're going to take this item 1 of
and take another one here and do this here.
Same thing there, but we'll do this one will be item 2.
And we might need to look at this again just
to kind of get a sense of.
I'll copy this here, duplicate it,
just so you have a sense of what we're
trying to identify in this.
So again, type in, just for the sake of exercise here,
Vanderbilt University.
And when I click on it, OK, latitude and longitude.
So I need to get this number and this number.
So that's going to be here item 1.
It's going to be item 2 of item 1 and item 2 of item 2,
because that is item 1, but item 2 of item 1.
And this is item 2 and item 2 of item 2.
So let's just test it out with one of these
and we'll see if we get the right information here.
There we go, 36.
That's right.
And here, we should get negative 86.
That's right.
So that's the way that we need to be
able to capture that information coming out of our college.
So we'll put this down here for latitude.
This is the tricky one.
Which is latitude and which is longitude?
Well, we'll find out in a minute.
And here we go.
And we'll get these off the stage
because we don't need them any longer.
All right.
And we'll duplicate this variable here.
We'll just pull it out.
Oops.
And drop it in here and drop it in here.
Now, let's just try Vanderbilt just
to see if we've got this right.
So it should ask me where I'd like to go,
what college am I thinking of.
Let's say Vanderbilt University.
Click on that.
And we don't seem to have gotten there.
Oh, of course we did because that's where we are.
Let's try a different one.
That's not too helpful.
So maybe it's working, but let's try it again.
Let's try Harvard University.
Yeah, it's working.
OK.
And let's try Michigan State just
to make sure everything is working fine here.
So Michigan State University.
There we go, East Lansing, Michigan.
OK, so it's definitely working.
We've got our latitude and longitude
in the right places.
You can adjust the zoom.
So if you want to get a little bit closer,
you could type in, for example, 11.
We can just try this again.
So let's try my alma mater, Kenyon College.
And there you go.
So you can get a little bit closer even still
if you type in higher numbers, you'll get greater zoom.
Obviously, if you have lower numbers,
you'll pull back more and get more of the encompassing area.
OK, so that, I think, is where we'll leave it for now.
We're going to continue this exercise of learning
to display information on maps in our next videos.
But that's a short introduction to how to use the map
and how to look up information using geolocation
and then to bring us to that point on a map.
So thanks, everyone, for joining me.
And I'll see you in the next video.
