Hi, everyone.
Welcome back to Programming for a Networked World.
In today's episode, we're going to be continuing
our exploration of mapping.
But today, we're going to see how
we can make a map more dynamic.
We want to be able to scroll around on the map
and see what exists over the map's horizon, so to speak.
So ready to explore the world by scrolling through maps?
Let's get started.
OK, so we'll begin today, just like we
have in other ones of these particular series,
by bringing out a map and displaying it on the stage.
So here, I'm going to go over to get our block for the map
and go down to Google Maps.
And then we get to Google Maps.
Here we go.
Let's see.
We're going to Git Map.
There we go.
OK, and we've got latitude, longitude, width, and zoom.
We'll fill all that in.
But we want to start with our latitude and longitude.
So we want to actually look up where we are.
So let's go back over here to Network.
And let's pull out the call block here.
And let's get the geolocation, RPC.
And we're going to geolocate.
And we'll geolocate our address.
Let's just say Nashville.
OK, and we'll call this.
And we'll get our latitude and longitude.
Now, let's create some variables for that.
So we're going to be using this here.
So let's go to our Variable tab.
And we're going to make a variable.
And let's just call it one latitude.
How about just lat?
That's easier.
Lat.
And then we'll create one for longitude.
So we'll make a variable for lon, like that.
And then we're going to make a variable for the zoom.
OK, so we've got those three things
that we need here to fill in the various slots in Google Maps.
So let's assign them.
So we'll start by assigning a longitude.
And that's going to be here.
We need to use the item of block.
And we need to get to item 2 of item 1, I think.
Let's try that.
Let's try that.
So here we go.
We'll pull this down.
Oops.
Pull it down here and click on it.
And 36, I think that's going to be right.
That's the latitude.
OK, there we go.
So that one we should set to latitude.
And then let's do the same thing here.
But we'll duplicate this block and put it here.
And we're going to switch this to the longitude.
And now let's do item 2.
And let's see if we can set that.
So we have our lat and our longitude set.
And zoom we'll set later.
We don't need to display these on the stage.
So we're going to unclick those boxes there.
But we know we have that information captured.
And then we want to be able to put this into our map.
So let's go ahead and get the size of the stage
like we normally do from sensing.
So we'll go over here to get stage height, stage width.
Stage height, stage width.
And now we'll use our variables to fill in the rest.
So latitude here, longitude here.
And let's set an initial zoom of, let's say, 10.
OK.
So what we want to do is we want to set those variables up
when we first start our program.
And then we want to pass them into something
that will create the map for us.
So what we're going to do is we'll use a hat block here
to say, when clicked, we're going
to go to set these variables from our geolocation.
And we could make this a little bit more dynamic
by actually allowing people to choose what city they're in.
Maybe we ought to go ahead and do that.
So we can go to Looks, or actually to Sensing,
I guess, right here, and ask what city.
Or how about select a city or enter a city.
How about that?
And wait.
And then we can use the answer here instead of just natural.
So that'll help us to start a little bit more dynamically.
And now, we'll start it that way.
But then we need to call this particular block.
So here, we're going to actually use an event.
So we'll go over to our operators here.
And actually, I think it's under Control.
OK, Broadcast.
That's what we want.
OK.
So we're going to broadcast an event.
And let's just drop this down here.
And we're going to say New.
And we'll say, how about Show Map?
OK.
So we'll say Show Map.
And then we're going to handle that event.
So when I receive a Show Map, then we're
going to display on the stage.
We're going to switch to the costume of this particular map.
And we'll put it in this block here.
And we'll show that map.
Now, this ought to work at this point.
So let's try that.
We're going to click on this.
And we're going to say Nashville, like that.
And then, if any luck, it should show us the map.
Let's see.
Did we miss something here?
I think we didn't plug in our variables.
No, we do.
We have lat and long.
We just need to have zoom.
Let's see here.
Let's pull that over under Variables.
OK, so we'll get zoom here.
OK, so it should show it.
Let's just see if that works again.
All right, so pick a city.
We'll say, this time, Boston.
OK, yeah, it's working.
OK, so we didn't have zoom in before.
So it didn't know how to zoom in.
So we didn't see the map.
OK, now the thing is, we need to make it more dynamic.
We want to be able to actually move up.
Right now, if I use my scroll keys or arrow keys,
I can't move the map.
It's just a map that is what it is.
There's no way to zoom in.
There's no way to move up or down, explore the area.
So we want to make our map more dynamic.
All right, how would we go about doing that?
Well, the thing that we need to do
is just change slightly where our location is.
So we know that we have that location already here captured
in latitude and longitude.
So it would be simple, I think, to just say, OK,
let's just change that.
So we could, in response to a particular keystroke,
let's say an up arrow, we could add some code to handle that.
So let's go over here to say, when I'm
going to see if I get some space down here.
An up arrow is clicked.
Then we want to move up.
But how do we move up?
Well, we add to our latitude.
Oh, actually, this should be longitude, right?
Let's see.
So 42, let's see what's going on.
All right, so let's try this.
So we're going to take our lat, and we're going to add to it.
All right, so here we go.
All right, and so we're going to add.
But what do we add to it?
Well, let's just try adding one to it.
And then we'll call the map again.
All right, so here we go.
Let's do that.
When we do that, we just need to broadcast the map.
I guess we'll pull that down again here.
So let's go over to Broadcast, and we'll
broadcast that we need to recreate that map, the show
map.
OK, so that's in place now.
And so let's try the up arrow.
If we do that, you can see that we are definitely moving,
and we're moving up.
But we're moving up in a kind of,
it's hard to know how much we're moving at a time,
but more than we probably want.
It's actually hard to keep track of where we are.
So let's try this again.
I'm going to go back to Boston.
And you can see that one movement up
moves us way north.
So we can't just move up by one.
That's a little bit of an arbitrary number.
And the thing is, it also depends
on how far zoomed in you are.
Adding one to our latitude, when it's really zoomed in,
moves us a long way.
But when we're zoomed out, may not move us much at all.
So we actually need to know the relative amount we
want to move at our level of zoom.
We can do that with a technique of finding the max latitude
and the min latitude at a particular level of zoom
on the map, and then taking the difference between those
and using that as the degree to which,
or the number that we're going to use to move up and down.
So let's figure out how to do that.
So here, I'm going to write a little routine
to find that information.
You'll see that under the Network tab
here, we can call Cloud Variables again.
And if we drop down to the maps, we'll
see here that we have min latitude and max latitude.
Let's start with that.
So we're going to get max latitude.
Service is not available, but fortunately it is.
And we'll duplicate that.
And we're going to get the min latitude.
So that's going to be the latitude
at the top and the bottom of our map that's in view right now.
And so then we can take the difference between them.
And so I'll just pull this over here.
And we'll put the min latitude here and the max latitude
there.
And we'll get a difference between the top and the bottom.
Let me see if I can just pull this whole block over.
Here we go.
And so if I click on this block, you'll
see here that it's 0.359.
So that's showing us, OK, if you want
to move a full page view up, that
would be the amount that we would need to do.
But we actually don't want to move probably even that much.
We probably just want to move a quarter
of the screen at a time.
That gives us the sense of continuity
as we're kind of moving through.
So let me just drop this into here, if I can grab it.
There we go.
Get it in the right slot.
There we go.
I need more space over here.
So let's do that.
And I'm going to put in four into this slot,
if I can move it in the right place.
There we go.
So I'm going to put four right here.
And you can see now that we get this number that's
fairly small, but that will give us
a much more effective sense of scrolling through the map.
So now that we've got that, that's
what we want to use to figure out every time when
we need to set a variable to capture that information.
And then that will help us to know how much we need to move.
So when we regenerate the map with a zoom level,
we should probably also capture this information.
So what I'll do is I will create a variable up here.
Let's enter variables.
And I'm going to call it, let's see.
Let's see, I'll make a variable.
And let's just call it scroll amount.
And let's set that variable.
And we're going to put this down here,
scroll amount to this number.
OK, now let's try that again.
Let's bring our map back so we can see it here.
And I'm going to turn scroll amount off.
We'll just hit the green flag, get back to,
let's try Nashville again.
OK, so we're in Nashville.
Now let me try the up arrow.
Oh, wait, wait, wait.
I think the reason it's not working
is we haven't put the variable in the right place.
So let's do that here.
We're going to put scroll amount in here.
And now let's start again.
There we go.
All right, ready?
Now you can see the continuity of the screen
as we go into Kentucky.
So in order to get this to work as a full feature scrolling
map, we just need to replace this.
Let's see if we can do this here pretty quickly.
We need to handle all four events.
We need to do an up arrow.
Whoa, not sure what happened to that one.
OK, let's try that again.
So let's do this.
We're going to duplicate it.
Oops, just got part of it here, but we'll duplicate the rest.
There we go.
And then let's duplicate it again.
There we go, put it there.
Our scripting area is getting kind of crowded.
OK, so let's do up arrow and then down arrow.
Down arrow, of course, we want this,
but we want this to be subtracted.
So let's go over here and get that.
There we go.
So we want that to be subtracted.
And so that's the lat and the scroll amount.
There we go.
OK, and now let's do the same thing again here.
So we've got up, down, and now we need left.
And this one, of course, will be longitude.
So let's get that from variables over here.
So there's longitude.
Now, you might ask, do we need to capture
that information for the max longitude and the min
longitude in the same way that we did the max latitude
or the max, yeah, the max latitude and the min latitude?
The thing is, actually, those numbers
are basically the same.
So in this case, since our map is square,
we don't really need to worry about that.
We can just use those same numbers and it should be fine.
So we're going to just stay with the scroll amount that we have.
And then the only thing that we need to do here
is to also change this.
And I'll just kind of duplicate this one up here.
There we go.
Oh, no, let's get that back.
OK, let's duplicate it, bring it down here.
Then we'll switch this one out, grab the longitude,
subtract, and throw this in here.
OK, so we should be handling all of the events now.
So let's see how that works.
So we'll start again.
Let's try Houston.
OK, so we're in Houston.
Let's go up.
Oh, OK, that did not work as I expected.
So let's see what we did wrong here.
OK, one other thing that we didn't change, you see?
Simple bug here.
So the up arrow is setting the lat to lat plus scroll amount.
The down arrow, we need to change these
to the longitude and the longitude.
OK, so that's good.
Although, I don't see why that's affecting that.
Let's try it again here.
OK, Houston.
OK, I think we've got it working now.
Let's try it.
So we should be able to move around.
And there we go.
Now, there's one that's not working.
Let's see.
Just double check here.
So down arrow, left arrow, up arrow.
Oh, we've got up arrow in there twice.
Actually, I think that was the cause of the bug.
So now we want to go right arrow this direction.
Let's see if we've got that.
And we may actually have these backwards.
Let's try right arrow and left arrow.
There we go.
OK.
All right, here we go.
Bring this map over.
OK, up, down, left, right, up again, down again.
OK, so you see now that we have a scrolling
map, which is fantastic.
There's only one thing left that we have to do.
We have to be able to change our level of zoom.
So let's pick another when something key is pressed block.
And in this case, we're going to pick the plus.
And that will increase our zoom level.
And then we'll do the same thing,
but we'll do it in reverse when we get the negative.
So I'll just duplicate this here.
This is going to be roughly parallel code.
And we'll change that to a negative.
OK, so we just need to adjust our level of zoom.
So we came in with that default level of 10.
So here, we'll set.
And so when this plus key is pressed,
we're going to set the zoom to one level higher.
So let's go to get our variable zoom.
Here we go.
And we'll just say zoom plus 1.
And same thing happens, but in the other direction.
So we'll just duplicate this here, put this here.
And we'll set the zoom.
But in this case, we're going to go the other direction.
So let's pick it as minus.
And we'll put this in here.
And we'll subtract 1.
OK, so here we go.
OK, let's try.
Stop it, and we'll just run it again.
OK, San Francisco.
There we go.
Now, let's try zooming in.
I'm not getting a response right here.
Let's see.
We just click on this.
Oh, well, there's a reason.
You see, we've got the plus sign here.
But the last thing we need to do is use this broadcast.
So let's do that.
We'll bring this down here.
And we're going to do the same thing here.
Let's duplicate that.
There we go.
Because we have to obviously pass it back to the map
so that it can actually reset the level of zoom.
OK, and then in the map itself, we've
got the zoom where we expect it to be right there.
OK, so now let's try zooming out.
Let's see, there we go.
Whoops, that's zooming in.
No, it's zooming out.
OK, perfect.
There we go.
And we want to zoom back in.
There we go.
Now, the trick is, at the level of zoom that we have,
will our arrows work correctly?
And they do.
We're still getting the difference
between the max longitude and the min longitude
for the level of zoom we have in the map, which
means that we're scrolling at the right level.
So in the end, I want to thank kittyhacker101
for the idea of how to develop a scrolling map.
Although my technique is a little bit different than
that person's technique, I appreciate the inspiration.
So OK, in our next video, we'll sum up our work on mapping.
And look forward to seeing you then.
