Hi everyone, welcome back to our series on programming for a networked world.
In this video, we are covering two-dimensional lists.
The term two-dimensional list is a formal way of talking about a very common data structure
that we may alternatively call a list of lists, a matrix, a table, or a spreadsheet.
Keeping track of data using columns and rows proves efficient in many scenarios.
Netsblocks also optimizes the display of two-dimensional lists to make it easier for you to read and
edit them.
Ready to expand your knowledge of lists into the second dimension?
Let's get started.
What is a two-dimensional list?
In the last video, we talked about one-dimensional lists.
As you recall, a one-dimensional list is just an ordered sequence of items.
So my grocery list is a one-dimensional list.
I need to buy eggs, milk, tea, and so on.
But I also mentioned that lists can hold data beyond strings and numbers.
A list can contain sprites, for instance, or blocks.
But what happens if you put a list inside of a list?
Now you have a two-dimensional list.
How might a list of lists prove valuable in a program?
Let's imagine a scenario where you are programming for people who are speaking different languages,
and you wanted Ada to interact with them in their own languages.
You might want to keep a table of equivalent phrases from those different languages.
So for instance, I might want to create a list of greetings to use in my program.
My English greeting would be Hello, my Dutch greeting would be Guten Tag, my German greeting
would be Guten Tag, and my Chinese greeting might be Ni Hao.
And I would want to put all those greetings into a list.
And just so we had an equivalent way to say goodbye, I'd want to do the same for saying
goodbye in Chinese, Dutch, French, German, etc.
So how can we keep all that information together?
The answer is simple.
We just have to put both lists inside of a list.
And that will make a two-dimensional list.
And then we'll see, as we do that, that it forms what looks like a table in NetsBlocks.
So let's get started and see how that works.
So I'm going to grab a list here and bring it over.
And now I'm going to put on this list a series of languages we want to use.
So let's say Chinese, and Dutch, and French, and German, and English, let's not forget
English.
OK, so that's a good list.
And then let's put the greetings that we want for each of these.
So I'm going to open up slots now for each one of these languages to put in the way that
we would like to greet people.
So let's say in Chinese, that's Ni Hao.
And then in Dutch, Guten Tag.
And in German, oh, it's in French, Bonjour.
And in German, Guten Tag.
And in English, hello.
Now let's do the same thing with another list where we say our goodbyes.
OK, whoops, keep clicking on it when I don't mean to, just when I get those arrows.
OK, so Chinese, that would be Zai Jian.
And in Dutch, we'll say Tot Ziens.
And in French, Au Revoir.
And in German, let's say Tschüss.
Oops, there we go.
And in English, finally, we'll just say, goodbye.
OK, so now we have these three lists, but we want to put them together so that they're
just a single data structure.
And here's where the cool thing happens with a two-dimensional list.
So I'm going to take a list, and I'm going to open three slots.
And I'm going to move the first list into the first slot, the second list into the second
slot, and I'm going to move the third list into the third slot here.
Now this is a two-dimensional list.
You can see that it's a list of lists.
And when I click on it, it displays like a table.
So you can see here that this is the column with the Chinese greetings and the Dutch greetings,
the French greetings, the German greetings, and the English greetings.
Now if you want to extract any information from this, how would you do that?
OK, so you would use the same item of, and then you would drop this list of lists into
it.
But now what is item one going to get us?
And here's where we have to learn to think about how lists of lists are composed.
So if we ask for item one of this list, it's going to return us the first list.
There we go, Chinese, Dutch, French, and German.
So if we actually wanted to get item one of that list, then we'd put item one around
this again like this, item one of, like that.
And then we get Chinese, OK?
And so if we wanted to, for example, have bonjour, then we'd have to go to, can you
guess it, item two, so that's the second list right here, and then we want to get item three
from that list.
And there's bonjour.
So when you're thinking about it, make sure when you're indexing into these lists that
you index first into the lists that you want, and then subsequently into the item in the
list that's returned.
So thinking about this, you think about the list that you want first, and then the item
in that list.
And if you have more deeply nested lists, it's the same process.
You keep drilling down to the list that you want until you finally are able to pull out
an item from the list that you extract.
Now that we've seen how to do this, let's go ahead and build the program that we had
in mind.
So the program that I want to do is, I want to have Ada here greet us in our own language.
How should we do that?
So I'm going to start a program with when clicked, it's always a good starting point,
and then I'm going to create some variables.
Let's create script variables here, and I'm going to name the first one language, and
then I'm going to name the second one language selection.
Now that I have those variables, I want to set the languages, or the, I guess I'll call
this languages just to be clear.
I'm going to set the languages to our list of lists.
And then I want Ada to ask us what language we prefer her to speak in.
So I'll bring this down here for this ask block, and I'm going to say, what language
do you speak?
I guess we have to start off with English because there is no neutral language obviously.
So we'll start with English, and then we'll say, what language do you speak?
And remember that the answer will come in the form of this answer block.
Okay.
Then we want to set the language here.
We want to set the language selection, and here's what we have to think about.
We want to set it to the index of the response in the first list.
So we know the first list contains all the languages that we have.
So we have a block down here that says the index of, so we want to look up where this
answer block appears, where this answer appears in our first list.
And so we need to know that, but we also have to extract that first list.
We can't just give it the list of lists.
We need to get the first list in the list of lists like this.
So now we're going to be asking, okay, for the language that you responded, what language
is that in our list of lists?
So basically, what column is it?
And then by identifying that column, we'll know in the future where to draw the equivalent
language forms for Ada's responses.
So we'll now just do the second part.
Let's just do a simple hello, goodbye.
So Ada will say hello, and then Ada will say goodbye.
So I'll go to looks, and I'm going to bring over this hello block, and we'll use it twice.
But the first time, we're going to index into the list here, and I'm going to get item,
and I'm going to use language selection, because that's what we assigned here.
So we want item, language selection, and that's going to give us the index that we need of,
and we know that this particular row has all of the hellos, forms of saying hello in different
languages, so we want that with our languages.
And then we can duplicate this block, put it here, and we know the third row has all
the forms of goodbye.
So now I can drop this into here, and into here, and let's see if it works.
So I'll click on this, and Ada says, what language do you speak?
Let's start off with saying that we speak Chinese.
Aha.
I've got a mistake here.
Let's see what's going on.
Index of answer in item one of languages, oh, right, this should be languages, not language
selection.
There we go.
All right.
So let's try that again.
Got to use the right list.
Click on this, and we're going to say Chinese, and then Ada responds, ni hao, zai jian.
Let's try it again with, let's say German.
So we'll say German, speak German, guten tag, and tschuess.
Okay, just to test that it works with English too, let's try English, hello, goodbye.
Okay, just one more thing I'd like to show you.
So if you want to change your representation of a list of lists from a table like this
one into an actual list of lists representation, you can click on this and say list view, and
then your view will look like this.
You'll see that it's actually composed now of a list of lists.
You see the three lists within another list.
Most people prefer to see it as a table, but when you get multiply embedded lists, multidimensional
lists, three or four dimensions, then you'll need to look at that list of lists view.
The tricky thing when retrieving items from lists of lists is that you work from the outermost
list towards the innermost list, but your item of list block winds up getting stacked
in reverse order.
So the outermost block will give you the result from the innermost list, and so you kind of
need to think backwards from the inside out.
It's actually not different from any other stack of blocks and nets blocks which give
you values that you can then compute in other expressions.
And don't worry if you get mixed up from time to time about what list you're working with.
So do professional programmers.
Just try varying that index of, and you'll see eventually you'll get to the right item
in your list.
All right, so let's wrap up this video here.
In this video, you learned how to create two-dimensional lists in nets blocks and to explore those
lists in both tabular and list form.
You also learned how to index into two-dimensional lists to retrieve items of information.
And you built a program that demonstrates the utility of making lists of lists for tasks
like internationalization.
In the next video, we'll experiment with the call block to make lists and tables.
See you in the next video.
