Hi, welcome back everyone to Programming for a Network World. Today we're going to
wrap up our sessions on textual analysis in Netsbox and we're going to do
something fun. I don't know if you've seen the channel Translation Fails. I
think they changed their name to Twisted Translations, but the idea is that they
take song lyrics and then they run it through Google Translate multiple times
and whatever comes out is what the performer sings. So we're going to make
our own Translation Fails in this particular section and we're going to do
that by combining two RPCs that are built into Netsbox. So are you ready to
mess with song lyrics? Let's get started.
Okay, so here's what we're going to do. We're going to take out from the
Network tab over here the first RPC that we're going to use and if we drop down
we'll see here under music that we have access to Genius. Now for those of you
that don't know Genius, it's a site that gives you information about songs and
song lyrics and you can see here that if you drop down you'll see that you have
Get Artist, Get Song, Get Song Lyrics. Now all of these, if you click on them, will
take an ID. So we need to find out what that ID is first and the way we do that
is to search for songs. So let's just look for the song Don't Stop Believing.
I think that's how you spell it. And we get back actually 10 that have that
match. Let's take a look. Let's actually just go in and take a look at
this a little more carefully by getting the first item. There we go. So item one
and that gives us this chart here. Don't Stop Believing. This one is by The Rock.
Oops, if I can pull this across. The Rock of Ages movie. Okay, but in any case we can
use this version of the song Don't Stop Believing to get our ID which is the
first item there. So let's go over and just get our library for structured data
that we've used before just to make it clear what we're doing. So let's get
structured data, bring it in, go to custom, and let's get the value of that. So we're
gonna drop that in here and we'll get the ID. I can't remember if it's
capitalized or lowercase. Okay, so we did it in caps and there it is. So that gives
us the ID of the song and now if we want to get the lyrics all we need to do is
call it again for the lyrics with that ID. So let's go to network here and go
over and back down to music and to Genius and we're gonna get the song
lyrics and then we're gonna drop this in here and there we go. Don't Stop Believing.
That looks like the song that we're looking for. Okay, and I see this one is
sung by two singers so I think they're indicating who's singing
what part so that's why we're seeing the in brackets there, but that should be
fine. Okay, now what we'd like to do is to take these lyrics and then pass them
into Google Translate, shuffle them between languages so they kind of get
mixed up and then have Ada present the lyrics back to us in English but in
their kind of mixed up form. So in order to do this we need to start building a
program that will allow us to search for the the lyrics that we want, then to
pull out the song lyrics, to tokenize them, to split them into segments by line
and then we're gonna pass them into Google Translate. So the other service
that we are gonna want to use is Google Translate and let's just see how that
works before we get started too far. So we're gonna go to language and then you
see here is translation and translation has a couple things that we're gonna use.
So one is get supported languages. This is just a list of the languages. I think
there are about a hundred, 111 languages that Google Translate supports and
here are their codes. So we'll use those codes. That'll be part of what we use so
we'll kind of leave this out here. But also, and let me just duplicate this, we
also can translate from language to language. So here we can put in a text
and we could say like don't stop believing and we could translate it from
English to say Chinese. Invalid key, please update your as your translation
API key. Well that doesn't sound too good. Let's try this again. Let's just try
FLR.
Okay, there we go. I think that we were just getting an error code because CN for
some reason isn't the code that we want but maybe I'll mention to Brian that we
should improve that error message. Okay, so there we go.
N'arrêtez pas de croire. Don't stop believing in French. All right, so that is
good and actually Chinese probably is ZH but anyway we'll leave it as it is. We
have to look it up here and find out. Yeah, there it is. ZH on T is traditional
Chinese so let's just try that just to see if we can do it. ZH dash on T.
There we go. Something like that. So excuse my Chinese but there you go.
Okay, so we can translate between different languages but the idea is in
going back and forth between these languages we'll lose some of the
exactitude of the translation. Again, this is just a function of machine language
transformation that it doesn't capture all the nuances perfectly especially as
you move between languages and so that should produce some funny lyrics for us
to work with. Okay, so let's now start putting all this together here.
All right, so let's start with just setting up our initial... we'll start with
a win clicked here and this is going to take up a lot of space so we'll see if I
can kind of get everything together and let's also put in some space for
some variables because we're going to need to use them as we go along but the
first one we'll do doesn't need a variable because we'll just do the
sensing that we normally do which is we're going to let Ada ask what song
that we're interested in. What song shall I sing? Okay, and then we'll wait for the
answer and of course the answer comes in this answer. Now here's where we're
going to need our first variable because we want to identify the song that we're
going to be talking about. So let's get the song ID. We'll use that as our first
variable here and the way that we do that, as you know, is we search the songs
and then we get this ID. So we're going to set that variable here to this but
let me move this over here so we've got more space. Okay, so it's not just going
to be don't stop believing. We're going to put in the answer there and we'll see
what it comes out as. Okay, so that'll and we want to set the song ID to that.
Okay, so that will give us the ID and now the next thing we want to get is the
song lyrics. So same process as we had before, song lyrics. We're just going to
set it to a variable here. So let's go over and set song lyrics to whatever
Genius calls with that ID and so we pass in ID here. Okay, and let's just test to
make sure that we're getting the results that we want. Let's go down and report
the results just to make sure we're on the right path here. So we should be
getting the song lyrics back and we click on this and again I'll say don't
stop believing and there the song lyrics come up. So good, we're on the right path
so far. Okay, now the only thing that's left to do is to split these into lines
and I think it's probably easier not to make another variable to do that. We can
just take this operator right here of split and put it into the song lyrics
themselves right there. So let's just drop this in here and then we're going
to split what comes back by line. So that should give us the various verses of the
song. We can test that again just to make sure it's working. I'm gonna have to
pick a shorter song. A song with a shorter title I should say. There we go.
Okay, it's working. We do have some like spaces that we need to fill in so we'll
these we should remove from our list so we'll have to think about how to do that
in a moment. But basically we've got everything that we want so the only
thing that we might want to do is capture the title of the song. So we
could also just do that here by putting the song title. Let's do this in
lowercase like we've done. Song title. All right and again with a variable here.
Now if you remember when we when we called this to get the information from
geniuses that we can actually just duplicate this probably. All right this
is item one. When we call this and we say like anything I'll try I am Walrus
this time we get the title it's the second item here. So what we'll want to
do then is we probably shouldn't call twice it would be better not to do that
but I think for sake of expediency I'm going to do that. So I'm just gonna
duplicate this here and put this in here and then we're gonna get item two of
that. I'm sorry we want item one that's still the same but what we want to
change here is title and I think it's lowercase. Let's just see if we're
getting the title now. So drop this back in here. Let me pull this out of the way.
Okay okay so let's pull this out of the way and just see if we're getting the
song title coming back. Should just actually mimic what we're putting in.
Yeah okay so that's good it's working. All right so we've got our pieces of
information that we need from Genius. Now we need to pass those into Google
Translate to do the mix of translations. All right so let's throw this out of the
way and we'll keep these pieces here but we don't need this any longer and we
don't need this any longer. All right the first thing that we want to do is to
create a list of the translations the languages that are supported by Google
Translate or Azure Translate in this particular case I think we may be using.
So I apologize for Google we may be using Azure. And so here we go let's then
fill this in and we'll say languages. Okay I'm gonna put this over to the side.
Okay so the languages that are supported we'll just assign to that variable there.
So let's do that and let's call and get those languages that are supported.
Okay so we're gonna set languages to call translation get supported languages.
So that's gonna give us that list that we saw and then we can work with that
list to pick languages that we want to translate into. Now this is this is the
tricky part we're gonna use this under the variables tab we're gonna use this
for each and just to make it clear what we're talking about we're gonna talk
about we're gonna work on each verse at a time gonna translate that and so let's
get the song lyrics. So for each verse in the song lyrics that's basically what
we're gonna iterate through we're gonna translate them. So let's now do a little
setup so the starting language that we're going to start with is going to be
English so and then the starting translation that we're going to start
with is is the verse. So let's do a couple variables inside here oops oops
there we go all right script variables we'll put it right here and so we're
gonna start with let's say the the source that's gonna be the the source
language and that will be English to start with and then the destination
language that's gonna be a random destination to any language that we
choose from that list and then we want our translated text so let's add that
whoops I didn't mean to run it there we go let's stop it so we'll say
translation okay so that's the three variables that we're going to need for
this now to start working on this let's begin by setting the translation to the
verse that we're going to use so that's what's coming in that's the original
untranslated version so that's going to be the what we start with as our
translation and then we're gonna have to send it for translation now remember
when I said that there are some lines that don't contain anything so one way
we can say it's just if there is a verse if there's any verse at all then we'll
do this if there's not we'll skip to the next line so that eliminates those gaps
in the verses the the places that came back as just empty spaces okay now let's
begin by setting the source because we're working with English songs to set
the source to English all right so the source will be to begin with is going to
be EN all right let's move this over here we're running out of space maybe if
I can pull this down a little bit create more space for us there we go
okay that's clearing up our scripting area a little bit okay so if there's a
verse we're gonna say okay the starting language is going to be English and now
we want to set the destination so let's do another variable here oops under
variables we're going to set the destination to now what do we set the
destination to well here's where we want to pick a random item so in order to get
a random item let's just look at this Google Translate again I'm going to
duplicate this and let's drop this down to that get supported languages so in
order to get a random item we will just get a number from one to now we could
just put in 111 but that's that's hard coding data and you know as your might
add another language so we're gonna leave our options open so we'll say to
the length of this so that's going to be some number that's there actually I
shouldn't pick one two I want a random number so let's go over here so I think
random might be over here pick random okay that's what I wanted so let's do
pick random from one to link that so that should just gives a random number
every time good up to the length of the list of translations that are supported
by Azure okay and now we just want to pick one of those from this language
translation so let's let's call that here and we're just going to use the
item of put this in as our list put this in as the number that we want so that
will get a random one each time let's just see how it works so now we see we
got AM which is a language code for something I don't know OTQ YUE LZH okay
all these languages I'm not familiar with but what we do see is that we want
item one of it that's the code that we want so we're gonna put item one around
this and that should just come out with the code with nothing else okay so we're
seeing the codes there okay that's perfect now we don't need to call out
twice because we're actually going to use this variable languages that we've
set up here so let's pull this whoops that's actually what the length of want
to pull this out and we want to put in length of languages and then here we
want to pull this out and we just want to put in languages that way we're not
calling back and forth we're just using the call that we made one time up here
and so then we need to set the destination language to that random
language okay so that's good now we've got our source language and we've got
our destination language so that's awesome all we need to do now is to set
our translation so if we've got this we will set those and then let's let's do
the translation here under variables and set our translation did it go in let's
there we go and set our translation to translate now what we want to translate
is the verse here from the source
to the destination now I think we're gonna get rid of verse and I'll talk
about why in a moment but we're just gonna start with this translation which
is actually already been set it's the same as the verse when it starts okay so
we've got that ready now let's just see if we can say the translation
all right we're gonna put it in here whoop there we go it's not gonna be
hello it's going to be the translation and we'll just have it appear on screen
for a moment now let me pull this over and we'll see if it works okay which
song so they saying don't stop believing oh yeah we haven't translated it back to
English so we're translating it into random languages that is cool each time
a different verse into a different language but we need to remember that
after we do that we need to set it back to its its English form okay so let's
then duplicate this
and put this right here we don't need this twice okay so we're gonna set
translation here now here's the trick this source is English but if the second
time around it's not so we're gonna need to switch those variables and let's see
if we can do this here with variable to set it okay so we're gonna set the
source now to the destination so basically swap those variables and then
the destination here is going to be English so that's where we end so we
know that that's that's hard-coded so source is first English and then we set
the destination to a random language and we translate from the source which is
English to that random language then we're translating back because we have
to indicate what language it was so now we're translating from the source which
is the random language that we chose back in English and then saying the
translation so let's see if that works
don't stop believing don't stop believing
okay so it's working but if you really want to make it crazy you need to move
between languages more than once so let's add in a repeat block and the only
trick here is just getting the repeat block into the right place so here I go
I'm gonna grab repeat I think we'll just do it three times so I'm gonna drop it
in right there and this part here should work
let's see if we go like that okay so we're going to set the destination
gonna call the translation I'm gonna switch the source to the destination and
then we're gonna repeat not ten times which would be a lot of calls but three
times and then we'll come back and set it to English for our final presentation
of what Ada would be singing if we could hear her sing all right that should
produce the wanted effect of really scrambling the lyrics let's try it out
all right here we go drumroll should we do I'm the walrus this time if I can
spell it I am the walrus okay walrus song
he's the one you are and we're all together it's close enough look how they
run like pigs out of the guns see how they fly I'm crying cry surah to sitting
on the ledge I'm waiting for the pain to come
company shirt bloodied class man you're an ugly boy and you let your face grow
for a long time choir I'm an egg an egg I'm a walrus goo goo good you well no
one really knows what that means anyway so that's hard to translate all right so
we'll wrap it up there this is as you see just a fun exercise showing you
again how you can combine two RPCs to create a fun effect if you like extra
credit I would encourage you to make a video in which you use this tool to
create those lyrics and then sing it yourself I'd love to see it so thanks
very much for watching and we will see you in our next unit
