Hi, everyone.
Welcome back to Programming for a Networked World.
In today's session, we're going to continue
our exploration of natural language processing.
In particular, we're going to use
a technique called Named Entity Recognition, or NER.
We're going to use it to explore headlines in the news
and then pull out items of information
that we're interested in.
So ready to find people in the news?
Let's get started.
OK.
So for this project, we're going to use two RPCs.
And let me bring them out just so we can see what they are.
So the first RPC under Network here
is going to be where we get our news.
That's the New York Times here.
And you can see that it gives us options
to pull various pieces of information from the New York
Times.
We're going to go with Articles.
And let's go with the most popular.
And let's get the most viewed.
And that's going to give us a time period to choose from.
And let's pick for the week.
And so what happens when we click on this?
We get back a list of lists.
And we'll look at that later.
But it gives us basically the titles
that we're going to use to do some Named Entity Recognition.
The second is the Core NLP library here.
So this here should be under Language, Core NLP.
And here you see that it has what's called an annotator.
And you can annotate.
And then it says Get Annotators.
This will be a list of the annotators that we can use.
There's a whole bunch of things that we can explore here.
But today, we're going to be using the Named Entity
Recognition Annotator, NER.
So we'll go down and drop to Annotate.
And it asks us for a text and then the annotators.
Now, you notice that it's in plural.
So it actually wants you to give us a list of the annotators.
And let's just put this in list form
that we're only going to use that one.
And we're going to say NER.
So that should set us up for the RPCs that we're going to use.
Now, just to test this one to see what it looks like,
let's say this is Clifford Anderson's test.
OK, so we'll pass in some text.
We'll use this NER.
And then it's going to pass us back a sentence
with some value here.
Click into that.
And then we get three more lists here.
You can see the index 0.
There's entity mentions.
And then within entity mentions, there's
information about an entity that was mentioned.
And you can see here that this particular entity,
it identified Clifford Anderson as a person.
And it gives a confidence score here of 99%.
So we're 99% sure that I'm a person, which is a good thing.
So we'll use this technique of using the named entity
recognition.
But we're going to run it over the headlines that
are most popular in last week's news.
So in order to get this started, basically, this whole session
is just going to be working with lists.
And so we're going to be using our higher order functions that
work over lists, namely the map, keep, and I think
the other one, I always want to call it reduce.
But it's not called reduce.
It is called combine.
So we're going to be using those three, map, keep, combine,
in what follows to work with the lists that
come back from these RPCs and kind of drill down
to the results that we'd like to see.
OK, so let's get started.
And we'll use a bunch of variables throughout this.
So we might as well get that going here.
So let's go over here and just set up some script variables.
And the first one we'll just say is
going to be articles, say.
OK, so we'll get the articles.
And then we're going to set articles here
to the New York Times.
And so that part is pretty straightforward.
Now, the next thing we want to do
is when we get the articles back,
we want to be able to look and see what we got back.
Just the article, well, we always
need to have a control here.
We need to have the report block.
So let's report that.
Now, this is a little hard to read.
So let's just report for right now maybe the first row.
Take a look.
And here's the information that comes back.
Pull this over a little bit.
OK, so here's the title of the article.
This was Trump pulling a Putin amid the current crisis.
There's an abstract.
There's the byline section and everything like that.
So you can see here that what we want is the title.
Now, the easiest way to get the title
is to go back to our library.
And let's just open this here.
We want to import a library.
So let's go to Libraries.
And we want to use the Structured Data Library.
Here we go.
So pull that in.
And now under Custom, you can see that we've got value of.
So let's just substitute this item one of and say
value of title.
So probably need to, my guess is,
we're going to need to map this.
Let's try that.
All right.
Here we go.
Let's try that.
Now, let's see how that works for us.
There we go.
Now we have all the titles.
So the problem was we needed to go one step into the list
and then we went to map over each of the rows
in that long table and get the title out.
So now we've got the title.
But to pass this in, we could pass it
in as that 20 or so titles.
But it would be more efficient to actually combine
these titles together and then pass them all at once
into the RPC so we don't have to make 20 different calls out
to Core NLP.
So the way that we'll do that is we'll combine all these titles
into one.
Now, if we just combine them by joining this title like it is,
there won't be a space between the titles.
So we should probably put in a little space first
before we do that.
So let me just do that here.
I'm going to join.
And we'll just join a space at the end
just to separate out the last word from the first word
of the next title.
And I'm going to pull this in here.
And let's just take a look to see if this is working for us.
Should just put spaces in between.
So there's a space here at the end.
Now, how do we actually get this into a single list?
Well, there is that join here.
But this is meant for here's two strings.
How do you pass a list into this?
Well, here's a little trick.
So let's close up these spaces, these slots.
So it has no slots at all.
And I'm going to pull this map down.
I'm just going to drop it there where
there's no apparent slot.
And you see that it actually changes now to join input list.
So now it's going to join the strings that
come back from that map into a single string
without having to have a number of slots
open for each one of those strings.
It'll just assign those slots automatically
based on the length of the list.
So we click on that.
Now you can see, if you look at this,
it's kind of hard to see, that we've
got a set of titles, all one next to the other,
but with a space in between.
So that's what we wanted.
So now that we've got that information,
we're going to set that to, let's call it, title.
So I'm going to make another variable here,
call it titles.
Then we're going to set titles here.
That should be titles.
OK.
I'm going to set titles here to the call out to Core NLP.
OK, so we're on our way.
Now, let's just see what comes back when we report that.
Take a look again, sort of see where we want to go next.
OK, so we're calling this out.
But here's the thing.
Oh, OK.
Sorry, this should be what we set here.
Getting ahead of myself.
So we're going to do that now.
Let's call out to Core NLP and sort of see
what comes back when we send titles
into the annotation here.
So there we go.
Let's try that.
Again, we get sentences, and then we get this list of lists,
and then we get this entity mention.
So there's a lot of information coming back.
And we kind of want to drill down and be able to just
get to the results.
So how can we do that?
Well, first, we could go over here and under our custom,
let's use this value and just get the sentences here.
So that gives us one step in.
OK, now let's take a look at what comes back.
OK, that's good.
And here now we have the entity mentions.
And the entity mentions here has information
about the people that are mentioned.
So that's what we want.
We just need to be able to get to those.
So let's do that again.
But now we're going to need to map over this.
So I think this is maybe a good place for us
to maybe make another variable.
So let's just call this one Sentences.
So we don't get too complex as we go forward.
And let's assign that to a variable here.
There we go.
OK, so now that we've captured it in sentences,
we want to drill down a little bit further.
And so let's do that again with another map.
So we'll report this information here just as we build this up.
And let's go over and get our map again.
Here.
And let's map.
And I believe that term was entity.
Well, let's take a look, because I don't remember offhand
what that term was.
So let's take a look.
OK, entity mentions.
So that's what we want to use here, entity mentions.
So let's see if we can get that out.
Entity mentions over sentences.
All right, try again.
OK, so now let's see what we've got here.
These are entities, in fact.
And there may be, you can see here, quite a few
and of different sorts.
They're not all people.
Some have to do with money.
And some have to do with number.
Some have to do with ideology.
So there's a lot that's here that we probably
don't want to have if we just want to look at the people.
OK, so what we could do then is filter this.
But in order to filter this, let's
make this list a little bit easier to read.
So we're going to call this, let's just
call these entities first.
All right, so we'll assign that value to entities.
And I think that one thing that we
could do to make this a little bit easier to read
is we could just take that list that's a little bit jagged
and make it a lot smoother.
And we can do that using a technique
that draws on combine and also on this append block.
So what we'll do is we're going to combine the values that
come back here from this map using this append block.
Now, what this will do is smooth out our list for us.
So now you can see that the list no longer is jagged.
It just has 34 entries here.
And only at the end, you see that you
get some extra information for some of these
that don't exist for others.
We'll ignore that for now, because what we're going to do
is the next step is we're going to filter or keep
certain items that match our criteria.
So let's do that next.
But first, let's assign this here to entities.
OK, so I want to set that block under variables.
Here we go.
And I'm going to set it to entities,
bring this over here.
OK, so our next step here is to filter.
And let's go over and grab that, which is
the keep block in nets blocks.
We're going to keep items that meet a certain condition.
And the condition that we want to meet
is that they have an NER value equal to person.
So as we saw, there was lots of other possibilities
for named entity recognition.
But in this particular case, we want to keep the persons.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So we will grab from custom that the value here of the NER
in the list is going to be equal to person.
And the way that person is spelled here is in all caps.
And that's going to be from entities.
All right, let's see how that looks.
OK, now we've got a much smaller list.
And we should see, and I think it's going to be here in H,
that now these are all persons.
That whole row or column, H, is going to be just people.
So the last thing that we need to do to make this a little bit
easier to see is to take out the keys
and only look at the values.
This is a little bit tricky, but we'll show you how to do that.
So let's just put here, we're going
to call this one persons because that's what we're
dealing with at this point.
So we'll drop this down.
And we're going to set this, let's go here.
OK, we're going to set this variable to persons.
OK, here we go.
And we'll, oh, didn't drop down.
Persons, OK, not sure why that's not dropping down.
Let's try it again.
There we go, OK, set to persons, OK.
Now, to get rid of the keys, we just
need to map and get the, for each of the columns,
they all contain a list.
They have an item that shows the first item of the list
is the key, and the second is the value.
We just want to pull out the values.
We're going to need to map twice to do that.
So here's how we'll do this.
Going to take this map, and then we're
going to take another map, put it inside there.
Going to take this person's list.
We're going to map here item two of,
and this should map over every row, and then
every list in that row, or item in that row, which
is a key value pair, and just take the value portion.
Let's try that.
And there we go.
So now we can see the results.
If I can pull this down, we've got seven different people
that are mentioned.
You can see the names here, and you can also see here
the confidence scores.
This is other information about where those items are found
in the text.
If we wanted to see the keys, we actually got rid of the keys.
We'd have to go back and look.
But for now, we've got a nice table
that indicates who exactly we're looking for here,
or we've discovered in the news, and these
are the people that were most mentioned in the news
during the last week.
Now, if we want to look about Benjamin,
I think we'd have to do some investigation.
But otherwise, most of the names here are fairly recognizable.
So that's what we'll do today.
That's the end of our session today.
You can see how named entity recognition works.
You can also see that when you're
working with these complex lists,
you really have to master that ability
to apply the different higher order list
blocks that we've looked at.
So that's map, keep, and combine.
And by using them, you can process these lists really
efficiently and get to the results that you'd like to see.
So we'll continue with our exploration
of natural language processing again next week,
but that wraps it up for this segment.
Thank you very much, and see you in the next one.
Bye bye.
