Hello, everyone.
Welcome back to Programming for a Network World.
Today, we're going to continue our exploration
of remote procedure calls, or RPCs.
In this episode, we're going to be looking at data and ways
to visualize data.
It's very common, for example, when you access a data set
that you want to get a visual representation of it.
And fortunately, there's an RPC for that in NetsBlox.
So ready to visualize some data?
Let's get going.
All right.
So to begin, let's get the data itself.
So the data set that we're going to be using
is a data set collected at the Manaloa Observatory in Hawaii.
This data set tracks the level of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere.
And the reason that Manaloa is so useful
is that it's on an extinct mountaintop,
and the levels of carbon monoxide
are really unaffected by the environment around it,
which allows you to get kind of an average for the atmosphere
as a whole.
So we have an RPC that reaches out and gets
that historical data, and then brings it back to us
in list form in NetsBlox.
So let's start there.
We're going to go over to the Network tab here,
and we're going to go to our call block.
And we're going to drop down this call block,
and we're going to go here to Climate.
And then under Climate, you'll see Manaloa carbon dioxide
data.
And as you see here, we can get either the trend
or the raw CO2.
We're going to go with the trend.
And I believe the start year is 1958,
so we'll put that in as the beginning year.
And then the last year that's available to us in NetsBlox
is 2019.
So we'll use that as our delimiters,
and then we can call this.
And you see that it provides a nice table form of the data
with the year, and the month, and then the recorded level.
OK, so that's great, but it's not easy necessarily
by just looking at this to see what the trend actually
looks like.
So in order to do that, we're going
to use the GNU plot charting service.
This is a free and open source library for plotting data,
and it's available to us again in NetsBlox.
So if I bring this over here and I drop down to Chart,
you'll see that it brings me a block that has two options.
One is to draw, and the other is default options.
So we can just use it with the default options
and then call with our own data set
and just see how it looks at first.
So I'll bring this in here to Lines.
And then for the options, you still
need to pass something in or do.
Maybe it works without it.
I think it actually worked without it.
So there you go.
If you don't need to change the options,
you can just let it go.
So let's look at this.
In this particular chart, you see
that it's actually too small to look at.
How do we visualize this better?
Well, we do that trick of going up to Looks
and using Switch to Costume.
So Switch to Costume will change the costume
of the sprite on the stage, in this case,
from Ada to the chart itself.
So we can drop that in.
Here we go.
And we can make that call.
And there you can see that already we
got a nice plot of the data.
And unfortunately, as it shows, from 1958 until 2020,
we've increased our carbon dioxide level
in the atmosphere substantially.
Can't do much about that in this particular video.
But we can at least, I think, maybe
label what we're seeing a little bit better.
So to do that, we need to dive back into those options.
So I'm going to bring over another block here.
And we're going to call out to chart.
Oops.
See if I can actually bring it over this time.
There we go.
I'm going to go to chart.
But this time, I'm going to look at the default options.
And if I click on that, you see that it brings me back
another list here in table form.
And it has some possibilities for us
to fill in information, like we can give a title.
And we could perhaps add something
to the y label or the y-axis.
But how do we do that?
We can't just type it in here and have it stick.
We need to first assign this default information
to a variable.
And then we'll change that information.
And then we'll send it back in.
So let's do that by first setting a variable.
Going to go here.
And we're going to set a variable.
Let's actually create one called chart options.
There we go.
And we'll drop down chart options in here.
We'll put that in.
And now we have that captured in a variable, which
allows us, of course, to change those options.
Now, since this particular list is in that key value format
that we talked about in an earlier video,
the easiest way to change it would be to go up here
and to open our library and look for the structured data
library.
Here we go.
And as you remember, structured data
allows us to make changes based on a key.
Then we can change the value.
So that should appear down here.
And that allows us to bring over this block set value.
And we'll bring it over a couple of times here.
And so we'll go over and we'll get our chart option,
because that's what we want to be setting.
And that's the list that we're working with.
Let's bring over another chart option here.
OK, whoops, in the wrong slot.
There we go.
And the first thing that we want to change is title.
Or title doesn't have any information right now.
So we want to change our title to something.
And we'll say CO2 in the atmosphere.
OK, we'll get that as the title.
Then the other thing that we want to change
is the y-axis here.
So there's the x-label and there's the y-label.
So we'll change this one down here to y-label.
And the y-label, we're going to label as parts per million,
PPM.
Oops, there we go, parts per million.
OK, now if I run this, you see that our chart option now
has CO2 in the atmosphere.
And it should have a label, PPM, under the y-label.
And now we can simply apply those as our new options
and call the chart again.
So those options are captured in this variable here.
And if we run this, and we turn off this
so we can see it a little bit better, if we run this,
now the chart has a title and it has a y-axis label.
All right, and if we want to just put everything together,
so it's one nice unit, we can do that.
Bring this down here.
There we go, connect it.
All right, and let's put a block on top of it
when Greenfly clicked.
And we'll click it.
And it ran.
So again, it went out with an RPC to fetch the data set.
And then it went out to find the default options.
We changed some of those options.
And then we called the GNU plot with our new options
and the data.
And we got this visualization.
All right, and we did that in just a handful of blocks.
So that wraps it up.
Thank you very much again for joining me.
And I look forward to seeing you in my next video.
