Hi, everyone.
Welcome back to Programming for a Networked World.
Today, we're continuing our exploration
of textual analysis by doing frequency analysis
over letters in particular texts.
So this is part two of a video.
If you haven't seen part one, you
should go back and view that first.
Today, we're just going to be continuing
with our exploration of the frequency patterns
in various texts and comparing them to the overall frequency
of letters in particular languages.
And our goal today is to visualize the results.
So ready to graph our frequencies?
Let's get started.
Here's where we were.
This is where we left off last time.
And if you remember, we are gathering the letter frequencies
for various languages here.
And then we're getting a particular text
from Project Gutenberg.
We are splitting that text up according
to the frequency in the book, getting the letters
and seeing how frequently they appear in the book.
And then we're getting the count of those letters,
and then the percentage of those letters,
and then assigning this to that percentage of letters
frequency variable.
So our goal, as I said, is to be able to graph our results.
And we need to do two things.
We want to graph the results that we're getting here
from this particular book.
And we also want to graph the results that
serve our baseline comparison from whatever language
we think the book may be written in.
So let's actually start with the baseline comparison.
So I'm going to go over here to we
have a variable that's over here, letter frequencies.
Let's just take a look at this.
When I click on this, I get that big chart.
And so we need to get rid of that chart.
And the way to do that is just we
want to pull out a particular language.
So let's grab, let's see here, a couple of blocks to do that.
We're going to need this item of.
And we're also going to need the higher order block here,
map over.
And so let's just take this here and put that there.
We want item four of the list.
And let's see how this works.
There.
So this pulls out, you can see here, German.
And then here are the frequencies for A, B, C, D, E,
and so forth in German.
And if we switch this to number five, we've got Spanish now.
So each time we switch this number,
and I think probably two is going to be English.
There we go.
So each time we use this, we get a different language
and its frequency of letters in that language just overall.
Now, you notice that we do also get the language name.
And we don't actually want that in our results
because we need to just work with the numbers themselves.
So we're going to use this convenient block called
allbutfirst.
It's a pretty common operation to divide lists
into head or tail of the list.
And the head is the first item in the list,
and the tail is the rest of the items.
So this just gets the tail of the list.
And if we click on that, then you can see that we have a list
here that goes from 1 to 26.
So that's our letter frequency for English.
So that's fantastic.
Now we just need to assign that to a variable.
So let's go over here.
We'll just make a script variable,
and we'll say baseline letter frequency.
And there we go.
And let's just put this.
We need to put it after we set the letter frequency.
So let's put a block in to set that.
Right here is probably the best place to do it.
Say baseline letter frequency.
And then we'll drop this into it.
So now we should have the frequencies
from the actual text that we're looking at as well
as our baseline frequencies, and we just need to graph them.
Now, to remember, we've done this before.
I'm going to go over to network.
We're going to see if I get more space here.
And we want to get this variable here or this block here.
And let's drop down to graph.
Let's see here.
There's a chart service, I think, is what it's called.
There we go.
And the chart service, if you recall,
has a set of default options already built in.
We're going to want to tweak these options,
but let's go with them for now.
So that'll just be our starting point.
And then let's duplicate this.
And there we go, a little bit more space.
Let's drop this down to just draw.
So draw takes the lines that we want to graph here
as well as the options.
So we can just drop the options in there for now.
And we have two things that we want to chart.
We want to chart the percentage of letters frequency
as well as the baseline letter frequency.
So to do that, we're going to pass in a list
with both of those there.
So we'll bring this over here.
We're going to open up another slot.
And let's pull them in.
So baseline letter frequency, we'll pull in first.
And then the percentage of letter frequency,
we'll in second.
And then we're going to report this.
Well, actually, don't want to report it, right?
We just want to visualize it on the stage.
So I'm going to throw this off to the side.
And let's pull down Looks here, switch to Costume,
because we want to actually switch to the charting service.
And Ada will disappear.
And our chart should appear if it worked correctly.
Just to make this work more smoothly,
we'll put a when clicked on top here to kick it all off.
There we go.
All right, so it's getting more complicated.
Let's see if it works.
All right, going out and getting the book,
getting the frequencies of the letters in the book.
And if it all works well, we should see a chart appear
fairly soon.
Still running, so not yet.
There we go.
So actually, that did pretty well.
The only thing is we don't really
know what this chart is showing us.
We do know because we know the context that this
is the percentage of the letters' appearance
in the alphabet and also in the text that we're looking at.
And then these are the letters themselves.
So first letter is A, all the way to Z.
And you can see here that actually this maps pretty well.
So it's a good chance.
And in fact, we've seen this before.
So it's a good chance.
And in fact, we haven't looked at the book.
But it's a good chance that this book is in English
because these values match pretty well.
So let's go ahead and put together
some of the items that would make this chart
a little bit more readable.
And again, we have a video on how
to do this earlier in our series.
So if you want to go back and refer to that
as I move a little bit more quickly here, please do so.
All right, so let's pull the, let's
pull in a library that we want to use here.
So I'm going to go to Libraries.
And the library I want to do is I
want to do Structured Data here.
So the reason I typed in Set is because it
has this block Set Value.
And I want to be able to use that because it'll
make our work a lot easier.
So I'm going to pull that in.
And it's under Custom now.
And so you can see here that I can now start
setting values by key here.
Now, we'll need to make yet another variable here
called Chart Options.
And then what we'll do is we'll go back to Variables here.
And we're going to Set Chart Options.
Let's see, it's a lot of stuff going on now.
But I think probably we'll just do it right here,
just because that's where we're starting to work with the chart.
So we're going to Set Chart Options.
And here, let's get this out of the way,
we'll set it to our baseline options.
Now, we're going to adjust those.
But we need to pass in this new chart options here into Options.
And so our goal now is to make the adjustments we
need in between this Set block and the Switch to Costume block.
So first thing let's do is set a title.
And let's actually, I'm going to duplicate this.
Maybe the way to do this is I'm just
going to duplicate this block right here.
I'm going to bring it down, because that'll
help us to see what the options are that we want to work with
and how to describe their keys.
So you see Title is right here.
So we want to set the title.
And we'll say, just say Set Title of,
and then let's bring the Chart Options block here.
There we go.
So set the title of Chart Options to,
and then we'll just say, Book versus Language.
OK.
And then let's duplicate this again.
So maybe I should have kept this a little bit separate,
easier to duplicate.
Now I've got pieces that I don't want, but that's all right.
We can get rid of them.
And I'm going to duplicate it again,
because we're going to want to set the x and y-axes.
OK, so let's do that.
And again, here's this Chart Options
so we can sort of see how to call them.
All right.
So we've got the x label and the y label.
So the x label here is going to be Letter of Alphabet.
And then the y label is Percentage of Letter Frequency.
All right.
So let's drop that in here.
And now the only other thing we could do
is we could also put in individual labels
to indicate what language we're dealing with,
as well as what book we're looking at.
We don't have that information yet, but we could get it.
So for example, we could make another variable saying,
Book Title.
Let's just do that.
So Book Title.
OK, and then we might want to use this Language Name.
Or I mean, I guess we could just call it Language.
OK.
So now we've got Book Title and Language.
How do we actually assign them to things?
Well, Book Title, we'll drop in here.
And we're going to duplicate this call, Project Gutenberg
block, drop it in here.
But instead of Get Text, we're going to get Info about it.
And then we'll type in the same ID.
We should probably abstract the ID out
and make it something separate here.
So that's on our to-do list if we
want to make this a little bit fancier.
But let's just actually call out to this
just to see how this works.
So this gives us, we're working with Which Winnie.
And we actually need the title here.
There's a title and a short title.
But we'll just grab the title.
So that is Item 2.
And that's going to give us the title.
But it's also going to give us the key for the title, which
we don't want.
So we're going to want Item 2 of Item 2.
There we go.
Let's see how that works.
OK, Which Winnie, the Story of a King's Daughter.
I wonder if we do 3 if we get any.
Oops, this one needs to be 3.
That is better.
Oh, that gets the author.
OK.
Maybe that's a better way to do it.
OK, so let's do that.
So we don't want to set book.
This is the wrong variable.
We want to set, got this down.
OK, here we go.
Let's go to book title.
OK, so now we have the book title.
So now we need to get the name of the language
that we're going to be using.
And you remember, we did that up here
when we did all of it first.
So I think what we could do then is just do the opposite.
So we could duplicate this.
And let's make another block under here.
And let's just, it should be a variable here.
OK, let's set this instead of all but first,
we're going to set this to language title.
And this stays.
I can keep this stuff variable and easy to move around.
OK, so that stays.
But we just want item 1.
So in this case, we just want the head
because that will give us the title.
And that will give us the language.
Again, we should probably extract this information out
so we're grabbing the same language
so there won't be any confusion about that.
But now we set the language, and then we set the book title.
So we can go down here.
And let me just pull this down and see
if I can duplicate this block.
There we go.
And we'll reconnect these things.
OK, so now what we want to set are the labels up here.
Let's see that it requires a list, which is good
because it's a list that are the labels that
are what correspond to the two lists that we sent in
that is charted.
OK, so let's grab list here.
And the first one I passed in was the baseline.
So that's going to be the language.
Let's grab that right here.
So I'll make my way down.
There we go.
And then the other one that we want is the book title.
So let's add that down here.
All right.
So that's good.
Now this just needs to be, I think,
what we say was labels, right?
Labels.
OK, so let's get labels in.
Now we're passing all this information in.
Let's get this out of the way so we're not confused by it.
And if we've done it correctly, now we
should have a chart that actually shows
the language and the proper labels.
So we'll run it again.
It takes a moment, again, to reach out and grab
all the data, to do all the parsing that's involved,
and then to draw the chart.
The chart drawing probably is the fastest part
of this whole operation.
So we'll give it a second to work through all those steps.
And there we go.
Now it's not totally perfect just
because our labels take up probably more space than we
want.
But you can see that we've got everything in the right place.
So percentage of letter frequency,
letter of the alphabet, book versus language.
Compare English to this book, Which
Lady by Elizabeth Champion.
And now you could change the language.
And let's do that here.
We'll try this one more time.
Let's go over to changing the language.
And again, it would be good to extract this out
so we don't get confused about what language we're
dealing with here.
So it's these two here that we're dealing with.
This is setting it to English by item 2 and item 2.
This would be definitely something
that we'd want to refine.
But let's set it to 5, get a different language,
and we'll see how those letter frequencies hold up.
Because the whole goal of this was
to see if we could find the baseline letter frequency
compared to actual frequencies of letters in a particular text
and then be able to tell whether that text was
written in a particular language or not
just by the patterns of letter usage alone.
So now that we're comparing it with a different baseline
from a different language, we would
expect to see that this graph looks somewhat different.
And the further the language is from English,
probably the more different this graph
would look because the patterns of letter usage
will differ more greatly.
All right, so now we compare it to Spanish.
And you can see here that, in fact, we
are seeing differences.
There are definitely some different spikes here.
I mean, not totally different, not radically different,
but I think that you can see that it's not
quite as in sync as it was in terms
of the English comparison.
So we'll stop there.
But I would invite you to explore this further,
try out other languages in our list,
and see if you maybe, for example,
could find another book in Project Gutenberg that's
written in a different language and compared to English,
or maybe try to discover what language it was in.
So that's just a simple technique
to explore how you would do something that's not even
really advanced text analytics, but uses
the abilities that are built into NIST blocks
to grab information from a particular source, Project
Gutenberg, to do some analysis of these patterns,
and then to use our charting service
to bring out their relationships.
So thank you very much for watching today,
and I look forward to seeing you in my next video.
