Hi, everyone.
Welcome back to Programming for a Network World.
Today, we're going to continue our exercise with mapping.
We're going to explore now how to put a map on the stage,
and then from there, how to display the weather
condition for any part of the country you're interested in.
All right, so ready to find some icons to display the weather?
Let's get going.
So let's get started by just creating a map again
like we did before.
So I'm going to go over to our RPC here under Network,
and I'm going to bring out this call block.
I'm going to switch it down to Google Maps,
and I'm going to then get map.
And let's do the latitude and longitude
just for where I am again.
So as you remember, the way that we do that,
we can go over here to Sensing, and we can drop down
to My Latitude, drop it in here, My Longitude over here,
then the Height there.
Let's try that again.
The Height there, and the Width, the Stage.
There we go.
This one is over here, so we'll just throw it away.
And we'll set a zoom of, let's just say, 11.
Get some of the surrounding area.
Now, remember, we need to go over to Looks,
switch to Costume, and we're going to drop this in there.
OK, so now I'm just going to give a little more space here.
OK, let's try this out.
And there's our map.
If I went a little bit too quickly there,
go back and review the other video,
because that's where we covered how to create these maps.
OK, so now that we've got a map, our goal today
is for us to be able to click on any part of this map
and then get an icon representing
the current weather conditions in that part of the map.
So if you think about what we need to do,
we need to trap a position using our xy-coordinate
of the stage.
And then we need to convert that xy-coordinate
into a latitude and longitude that we
can pass to some kind of weather RPC.
Hopefully, that exists.
It actually does in Nets Blocks.
And then we'll find an icon to represent the weather.
If that sounds complicated, it might
be using other programming languages.
But fortunately, there are tools within Nets Blocks
to make that process much easier.
So let's begin by thinking about how to get the xy-coordinates.
So let's try going to our RPCs to see if there's
anything that can help us here.
So I'm going to go down here.
And let's go back to Google Maps.
All right.
And let's look at our list of options again.
Now, when you look at the list of options, you see here,
get latitude from y and get longitude from x.
So that's exactly what we need.
We need to be able to click on an xy position
and then translate that into the latitude and longitude
of the map that we're looking at.
So let's just go ahead and try that out.
We're going to get latitude from x or latitude from y.
And I'll duplicate this here.
And get longitude from x.
So here is their x and y positions.
Now, we can give the information about where our x and y
is by going to the sensing block here
and saying mouse x and mouse y.
So let's just say mouse x and mouse y.
Now, we can click on it.
Oops.
Here.
Let's try that.
There we go.
And you see that it is now giving us those positions.
They're not the positions that we want,
because it's trapping where our mouse is actually
in the scripting area rather than on the stage.
But we'll get to that in a second.
So that's great.
That's actually the information that we need to pass
in to get our weather icon.
But how do we get the icon itself?
So let's go back to look at our list of RPCs here.
I'll bring this over again.
And let's drop this down.
And there's a section called Science here
that has a lot of information that
has to do with various different types of measurements,
historical trends.
We've looked at these before when we were doing our chart
RPC.
But if you look down here, you see under Science,
you also see Weather.
And so if we look now at what's possible for weather,
we see we've got a number of options.
We've got a description, humidity icon, temperature,
wind angle, speed.
So let's go for Icon.
And you see it does come with a latitude and longitude.
So now we can drop these blocks in here.
This is the latitude.
So let's drop that in there.
And this is the longitude.
And if we click on it, we get a cloudy icon.
Now, it's a little bit hard to tell what is cloudy,
because, again, we're trapping a XY position that's
on the stage, on the scripting area, excuse me,
rather than the stage.
And so we actually need to now look
to see where on the map that's on the stage
we can get a weather icon.
So let's think about how to do that.
Here, I think it's a little bit tricky.
We need to think about when you're
interacting with this map, a user will be on the map
and then click at some point in the map like this.
And then we want to trap that click,
then pass in the XY position of the place
that the person clicked on the map.
And then we want to translate that
into the corresponding icon for the current weather
conditions.
So I think the best way to do this
is to split between we're working right now
on the scripting area, but I think
we should split our project into using a stage and a sprite.
And so what I'm going to do is take this
that we've done here, this initial mapping setup,
and I'm going to move it over to the stage.
So I can just move it like this.
And it actually duplicates.
You can see that I still got a copy here,
but I'm going to throw that away.
And that's because if I go to the stage,
you'll see now that I've got a copy there.
So that's good.
And let's go up here and just kind of get
a when green flag clicked.
So we'll do that over here.
There we go, to start the project.
And now we want to trap here.
Anyone who clicks on the stage, we
want to kind of trap that event.
So you know when we're talking about events
that one way to capture them is to use a broadcast block.
So we're going to do this.
We're going to go over to when I am clicked.
So this is an event.
And then we're going to broadcast
that that event has occurred.
That way, we'll be able to capture that event
in our sprite, which is where we'll do our icons for the weather
conditions.
OK, so we'll just make this a very simple broadcast.
So I'll do that here.
And I'm going to say new.
And let's just call it look up weather, say.
So when this is clicked, it will look up the weather.
But we have nothing yet that will handle that broadcast.
So there's nothing here in our sprite
that will actually handle that.
So now we need to think, OK, when I receive this message,
what do I do?
So first of all, let's just start off with when I receive.
And if we drop down here, we can say look up weather.
So when I receive look up weather,
then I need to do something.
Now, we need to move to the xy position where the mouse is.
So let's do that.
Let's go to motion.
And we'll move to here.
Go to the xy position of the mouse.
So let's do that here.
Let's see, xy, there we go.
Mouse x and mouse y.
And then we're going to display the weather.
So same way that we need to get it onto the stage,
we're going to switch to that costume.
But this is now the sprites costume, not the stage.
And so let's do that.
We're going to go to looks.
Switch to costume here.
We're going to drop this into there.
Now, we've got our mouse x and mouse y.
So that's good.
OK, now the only thing that we need to do
is to draw that icon on this part of the stage.
The easiest way to do that is to use some
of the tools that come with Pen.
So here, we're going to go to stamp.
And all right, we'll stamp that particular icon
at that position on the stage.
So let's give it an initial try and see how it works.
So we start it.
I'm going to click here.
Let's see, are we handling the event yet?
OK, there we go.
Let's see.
Now, click there, click there, click there.
OK, so that's not working yet.
Let's go and see what is going on with our program here.
OK, when I receive lookup weather, go to X, Y, Z.
OK, when I receive lookup weather, go to X, Y position,
switch to costume.
Let's just make sure this is working here.
Yep, that looks good.
And then stamp, so there we go.
OK, so let me start this from scratch.
Now, you notice when I start from scratch,
I'm still leaving those icons on the stage.
So we actually want to remove them whenever
we hit the green flag click.
So let's do a little bit of setup here.
So let's go over to the stage here.
And when we first start up, we're
just going to hit Clear, OK?
So here, we'll just say, when green flag is clicked,
clear the stage, so just get rid of any of the icons
that had been there before.
And then we'll start from scratch.
And the other thing is, I think we want to also, well,
let's try it.
OK, so we're going to start it.
And there we go.
We're able to click and see the conditions around us.
But there's one problem.
You notice when we started here, we still
had one icon that was left over.
And that's because the sprite is still showing on the stage.
So one way to do that is to set it up
so that when we run this, we show the sprite,
and then we hide the sprite.
So let's do that here.
And let's go over to Show and to Hide.
And this will mean that we first show the sprite, we stamp,
and that leaves this permanent imprint of where
the sprite is on the stage.
And then we hide the sprite again
so we don't have that problem of a lingering weather
condition that persists past the beginning of the program.
All right, so let's try that one more time.
Can I click Stop, and then we'll hit Run.
And this first time, I guess it's still left there.
So let's try it again now because it should be hidden.
So I'm going to click this, Run.
You see things are gone now.
The sprites aren't showing because we've
hidden them right here.
And now we can test this out again.
So this should be the full program.
Let's just bring this out all the way.
And let's see how things are in Nashville today.
So downtown Nashville is cloudy.
Up by Vanderbilt, probably also cloudy.
Yep.
We could set our initial starting point.
Let's just go to the stage here, and let's
zoom out a little bit more.
Let's try, like, I don't know.
How about five?
And we'll click on that.
We'll get the new map.
Give it a second for the map to show.
There we go.
Now we're getting a much broader geographic area.
So let's try the same thing.
We'll look at various cities around.
So Nashville, again, should be cloudy.
But how is Indianapolis?
Partly cloudy, I guess, is what that means.
Washington, DC, cloudy at once.
Cloudy day all around.
How about Georgia?
Same thing.
How about Louisiana?
Wow, same thing.
All right, it's sunny as you head out to the Midwest.
OK, so that's it for today.
So just to recap, what you saw was that we can create a map.
And then by trapping the interaction with the map,
where we clicked with our mouse XY coordinates,
we can translate that into latitude and longitude
and pass that to another RPC that then gives us
information about the weather conditions
in that particular region of the map.
We'll continue with mapping next time.
So I look forward to seeing you in our next video.
