Hi, everyone.
Welcome back to Programming for a Network World.
Today, we're going to be exploring
how to use turtle graphics to draw really intricate designs
with NetSplox.
You won't be adding any new computational tools
to your toolkit, but you'll be able to put them together
in ways that really create beautiful and interesting
shapes.
So are you ready to bring out your inner artist?
Let's get started.
So as I say, today's goal is to draw some interesting shapes
using turtle graphics.
So to do that, we're going to have to say goodbye to Ada.
And let's do that right now.
I'm going to go to Costumes.
And we're just going to delete Ada.
And we get our default turtle back.
And now, we want to set up a script that will help
us to draw these designs.
This script will basically be a series of loops.
And we'll also use a script that will
And we'll also use a variable to control
the size of our drawing and increase that variable
as we go to make a sense of the drawing expanding.
OK, let's bring out our blocks now
to set up the basic structure that we'll use to draw
these figures on the stage.
All right, the first thing that we want to do
is let's just bring out a win green flag clicked block.
And then let's clear the screen.
So we're going to go to Pen.
And we're going to clear it.
So nothing will be there when we start.
And then I think what we'll do is
we'll point in the direction and go to 0, 0 just to control.
As you know, these are things that
control the turtle's orientation and its location on the stage.
So let's point in direction 90, 90.
And let's go to 0, 0.
OK, so that'll just kind of set us up
always being here at the center of the stage
pointing in the same direction.
So that's a good place to start.
We'll just kind of reset things as they are right now
whenever we start a new program.
And then I think we'll just move down to putting the pen down.
So now we're going to start the drawing process.
And here, we're going to bring in a series of loops
to iterate through and draw things on the screen.
So let's bring in a repeat block.
Let's do this three times, in fact.
So let's go over to Control.
And we're going to get this block that repeats.
And I'll put one right here.
And then inside of this repeat block,
let's put those two others.
So I'm going to put one right here.
Oops, if I can drag it out.
And then another right underneath it.
And then the thing that we want to do
is be able to move so that we'll draw something as we move.
And so we're going to do that.
We're going to move here.
I'll just take the default 10 steps.
And then we want to turn.
So we're going to turn some degree.
And this is kind of our basic structure here.
So let's just think about, OK, we've
got this set so that it will move, it will turn.
And let's do one more turn here at the end of this loop.
So once we get to the end of this loop,
these two inner loops will do something different right here.
All right, so now we've got this set up so that, in fact,
let's move this right here.
I think that might be better.
OK, so now that we've got this set up,
we want to put the pin up at the end.
And let's just test out where we are with this.
So ready?
So it's drawing a circle.
And it's kind of going over the same track again and again.
That's useful.
And it looks nice in its own way.
But I think we can improve upon it.
One thing that I'd like to do, if we look at what we have right
now, we don't have any variables here.
And that will allow us to do a bit of variation
in our drawing as we go.
So why don't we create a variable?
Let's call it size.
And I'll go over here to Variables, make a variable.
I'm going to call it size.
And I'm not going to show it on the stage.
There we go.
And let's use that size variable.
I'm going to set it at the very beginning.
Let's just set it to be 0 at the beginning.
But let's use that size variable.
Let's put it inside of the move block here.
So this one move block, let's just
move a certain number of steps.
And so the number of steps that we move
will be controlled by the size.
Right now it's 0.
So if we click on this, we won't end up drawing anything.
We're just going to be spinning around in a circle.
So we need to have some way to be
able to increment that variable.
So let's also move that change by block
that we've used before.
We're going to change the size by, let's say, 1.
And let's put this down here.
And so that's good, I think.
Let's try this out now and see if anything changes.
So now we get this kind of awesome spiral that's going.
And it's going to go, in fact, right off the stage.
It's a pretty big spiral.
But that's really cool.
Because we've just been changing the size of the steps,
it spirals out instead of staying a circle.
So you can see here now that we've got things set up
to look really nice.
We just have to experiment with some of these values
here to draw different shapes.
One other thing that we could do,
and I'll just kind of show you under the pen block.
It's kind of fun.
There are some other tools here to change, for example,
the color, the hue of the pen.
Or for example, you can drop this down.
You can see its saturation or its brightness.
And these will have different effects.
And so what I'll do, for example,
let's put this down here.
This is in our second loop.
And we'll change this by, let's just say,
1 each time we go through.
And then I want to just set up something
at the beginning that indicates what this color should
be when we start, just like we had everything
else for our initial variables.
So let's start by setting the pen here.
And we'll set its brightness to 0.
And that should allow us to slightly vary the drawings
that we make as we go along.
All right, so now let's start experimenting
with some different shapes and categories here.
Let's change this, for example, to 40, and then 3, and then 3.
And then maybe let's change this one down here to 60.
And let's see what this looks like.
So now you get a really cool kind
of sketch effect of a flower going out into infinity.
So I think that's really nice.
That's a really attractive design.
So let's try something else.
Let's experiment with another set of figures
here for our values.
And so let's try, this time, maybe 10, 9, 4.
And then for our angles, let's do 60 and 60.
And again, this is a more geometric design.
I mean, it looks like a star, but a really interesting star
with a center there.
That's an attractive design.
So let's keep experimenting.
All right, I think we might try something
a little bit more offbeat.
Let's try 13.
And let's think about this.
Maybe let's try 6, 6, 45, and 45.
All right, let's see what that looks like.
Ready?
So it's another flower-like design.
I think an interesting combination
of geometric figures that combine
to make this flower effect.
Now, one thing that I want to show you is,
you see here that we've got this turtle that's
drawing as it goes.
If you don't like that effect, you can actually turn that off.
And so let's go under Looks.
It's a hide block.
There it is, under Looks.
OK, so we're going to move that hide block into our stack.
And you'll see here now that if we do this again,
it just kind of grows without showing the turtle that's
actually doing the drawing.
And if you want to have a kind of animation effect,
that might be better than actually showing
the turtle doing the drawing.
OK, now let's try another combination.
Let's go for maybe, let's start up here.
And let's go for 40.
And then, I don't know, what do you think?
3, 3, 45, and maybe 90.
How about that?
OK, let's try this one.
So another star-like effect, but with some really interesting
inner patterns as well.
OK, once again, let's do something along these lines.
Let's just change this last one to 30, say.
Let's see how that differs.
And just by making that small change,
you see now that you have this kind of flower effect
rather than a star shape.
So it's amazing just changing some of these values
here what different shapes you get.
One last hint that I want to give you
is we've been seeing it draw as it goes along.
But there is a way to just kind of skip from the program
to the end result. And you can do that by going up here
and then clicking on Turbo Mode right here.
And so if you click on Turbo Mode and you click this now,
you won't even see any difference.
It just draws it on the stage.
So you don't have to wait for it to be drawn.
It speeds up the calculation so that actually the drawing
is more or less instantaneous.
And so let's try for our last one.
Let's just do something interesting here.
I'm going to actually change this down to hue.
And then we'll have to make sure we change this to hue as well.
And then let's change our value settings.
We'll stay with the numbers that we have here.
But let's go down and change this one to 90.
And this one should be 30.
OK, good.
All right.
And let's check this out.
And let's see, what have we gotten wrong here?
Oh, we forgot to set the pen back to brightness level 0.
Since we had it at maximum brightness,
we couldn't see the lines that were being drawn.
So now I'll set that back to brightness at 0.
And then I'm going to drop this down to hue.
And let's try this one.
So now you see that we've got this really interesting
geometric shape.
It's almost like an organic shape
within this set of triangles.
And so I would encourage you to experiment.
There are lots and lots of experiments
that have been inspired by Turtle Graphics and the Logo
programming language, as well as Scratch,
where people try all different types of configurations.
You could vary these loops.
You could add more variables.
You could introduce other angles at other times in this program
and produce really interesting geometric figures.
So I just wanted to show you in this video
that given what you've already learned in this course,
you can really actually do a lot.
And you can experiment with really interesting shapes
by using Turtle Graphics with loops and variables.
All right, so that sums it up for our first week.
I look forward to seeing you in our next video.
