Hello, everyone. Welcome back to our series on programming for a networked world.
Today, we're going to be talking about events.
So, events take place in the world all around us,
and we oftentimes have to respond to those events in appropriate ways.
For example, if someone's walking down the street and calls out,
Hey, Cliff!
Then my response should be,
Hey, how are you?
If I just walk on by and I don't respond,
that's also a type of event, but not a very friendly one.
So, when events occur,
our computer code also needs to respond to the user in such appropriate ways.
That means, as programmers,
we have to respond to those events by capturing them
and then setting a setup box up to respond to them appropriately.
We're going to learn how to do that in this video.
So, ready to trap events and respond to them appropriately?
Let's get started.
Okay, today our plan is actually very simple.
We're going to make a program that draws on the screen when we hold our mouse down.
To do that, we need to be able to capture the mouse down event.
So, I'm going to go over here to Control,
and then I'm going to pull over this hat block that has a space for a Boolean,
and there is a built-in mouse down detector
that will return a Boolean whenever the mouse is down or up.
And so, if the mouse is down, then this hat block will execute.
So, we just need to then put in code to respond to the event of the mouse being down.
Since we want to draw, let's put in code to draw on the screen.
So, we'll put in firstPinDown.
And now, I think we should also switch our costume,
so Ada will become a turtle again. It's easier to draw with.
And then we want to have the mouse go to the location on the screen where our pointer currently is.
And so, for that, we're going to go to x, y,
but we have to sense where the x and y are of our mouse.
So, it'll be mouseX and mouseY.
Now, you notice that the line disappeared on the screen here, and why is that?
Well, because my event is already wired up.
So, when I let go of the mouse, or when I clicked on it,
it went off to the side somewhere on the stage,
went off the stage onto the side of the screen where you can't see it.
So, we'll have to handle that in a moment.
But for now, let's just finish up this event,
and then when the event is over, we want to put the pin up, like this,
and now we've got a tool to help us draw on the screen.
You can see here that we can start drawing lines using this event,
just by capturing our mouse down button.
But as I said, we probably want to make it a little bit easier for people to get started,
so we can also capture the event of the when green flag is clicked.
And we've actually already seen this in other of our programs,
we just haven't called it out as an event.
So, let me bring when green flag clicked is over,
and now we put in some starter code that helps us to get a line properly for our drawings.
So, we should probably put in under pin that will clear the stage,
and we'll set the pin color to red, say,
and we'll set the pin size to make it a little bit bigger,
so that it's a little bit more striking.
There we go, that's three, that's good.
And we also might want to just start right at the beginning of the,
right in the center of the stage,
so that we don't start awkwardly off to the side by having to click on when mouse is down.
So now you can see, when we do that, we start at the center of the stage,
and I can draw, oh, that's not a very good triangle.
Maybe we should add another event that allows me to erase what I've done so far,
and then start over again without having to click on the green flag.
Because if I do that, you'll see that there's a line that goes up,
and then disappears when I go off the screen,
because it's trapping my event of clicking on the green flag.
So maybe we should add one more event that responds to a click of the space key.
Now you notice in this particular hat block,
we can drop down and see that it can respond to any key.
The space key is just a convenient one, because it's big and easy to locate.
So now, when we hit the space key, what we're going to do is we're going to clear,
and then we'll go back to the centers.
So let's do that, too, like this.
Okay, ready to try it?
So we hit the green flag.
Let's say I draw something like that.
I'm not really happy with that triangle,
so rather than going up in here and clicking again,
I'm just going to hit the space key, and there I can do that again.
So that's a quick introduction to events,
but you can combine events with something called messages
to create much more complex effects in your program.
So in our next video, we'll go deeper with events,
and we'll also introduce the concept of messaging.
But for now, you've learned how to trap events,
and then add blocks to handle them when they occur.
All right, so I'll see you in our next video.
